#summary The difference between AERO and AEO

A discussion pertaining to difference and usage of both resources can be found on the [http://sourceforge.net/mailarchive/forum.php?forum_name=aeo-devel&max_rows=25&style=nested&viewmonth=201102 AEO list] 


= Introduction =

Add your content here.


= Details =

Adverse event representation is a wide domain, and AERO and AEO aim at covering different aspects.
WC: let me get matters straight. So the example given by MC was a particular clinician in some institution follows some guideline and  for that reason he reports that a seizure occurred in some patient  who was given an immunization a few days earlier. I proposed to  clarify this example using referent tracking (RT) as in my AE paper.

Several particulars are involved of which the ones most salient for  our purposes are given a unique identifier (that is the principle of  RT). I give the identifiers as closely as possible to what is  written above:
#1: the immunization
#2: the patient
t3: the time at which the immunization was given
#3: the seizure
t5: the time the seizure happened

using RT, we can then represent matters (simplified because RT  templates require more info to be stated) following the templates  for instance-level relations discussed in the Relation Ontology paper:

#2 participant-of #1 at t3
#2 participant-of #3 at t5
t3 earlier t5 (this one can be made more precise in the context of  some guideline, f.i. t3 less-than-4-days-earlier-than t5. Note  further that this is just notational and that it is not done that  way in any practical system. We don’t create a relation for each  extra second that there might be between some events)

MC: yes - there are two guidelines involved. One describes the event
(such as described by the Brighton collaboration), the other describes
the time-frame in which such an event should present to be reported
upon, depending on the vaccine that was administered. An example of
the latter is available at http://vaers.hhs.gov/resources/VAERS_Table_of_Reportable_Events_Following_Vaccination.pdf
I am not planning on dealing with time interval to start with - time
information is explicitly specified in the reporting form used by the
clinicians, so our priority is the event description.


Note that at this point, we didn’t make use of any ontology,  although we followed ontological principles in making the  assertions. We only stated how the entities relate to each other. We  did not state what the entities ARE. To do that, we need to resort  to one or more ontologies. We need to find, if we wish at least, for  each particular to which we assigned an identifier, a  representational unit (RU) in some ontology (might be a distinct ontology for each particular) which is defined in such a way that  the definition for that RU is a description which corresponds to what we believe the particular to be. Thus if we find a RU which is labeled ‘immunization’ and that satisfies what #1 is (or is believed  to be), we can further assert:

#1 instance-of immunization

and similarly:

#3 instance-of seizure
t3 instance-of temporal region
t5 instance-of temporal region
#2 instance-of human being at t3 (also at t5. Note that whenever continuants are involved, we need to specify a time. If after the seizure, at t7, the patients dies, it might be that, depending on  how the RU ‘human being’ is defined, #2 is not anymore an instance  of human being, rather an instance of corps. Or it might even be  that according to the ontological theory used – ontological theories  being distinct from ontologies – #2 does not exist anymore, but that  something new started to exist that is-derived-from #2, according to  the definition thereof in RO)

MC: What I need to represent is much earlier on (compared to AEO),  i.e.
the #3, the seizure reported by the clinician.

WC: the issue is here indeed: from what ontology should the RUs be  drawn. If from some neurology ontology where the RU ‘seizure’ is  defined in terms of what is generally understood by it independent  of what caused it, that statement is unproblematic. If from the AEO  where ‘AEO: seizure’ would stand for a seizure resulting from ...,  then there might be a risk that the statement ‘#3 instance-of  AEO:seizure’ is wrong, but it can also be true. The fact is: it  might, and perhaps, cannot be known at that time. But that does not  change the fact that it is either one or the other.
I would prefer to take the RU from the cause-independent ontology.


MC: I agree. I thought AEO was that cause-independent ontology, due to
the classes being described using VAERS reports (at which stage as you
point out we simply don't know), and I believe this is where the
original misunderstanding was.

Those RUs should come from something like a symptom ontology, where
they would be defined independently of their cause.
For the special case I am considering, clinicians are using specific
guidelines to describe this seizure. In the paper I am here referring
too, "Generalized convulsive seizure as an adverse event following
immunization: case definition and guidelines for data collection,
analysis, and presentation." (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14741144
), the Brighton collaboration specifies a guideline to report seizure
as an adverse event following immunization (AEFI). This guideline
could still be applied to the description of a non-AEFI seizure; as
they are vaccine experts they are interested in formalizing
definitions for AEFI description.
I will call mc-seizure AEFI:seizure; this being the clinicians term
and the acronym AEFI indicating that the event follows the injection,
i.e. there is the temporal association but nothing else.

I aim at creating a framework allowing to describe the AEFI:seizure,
the guidelines it is associated with (could be Brighton, VAERS or
else), and the specifics of the seizure as described by those
guidelines (such as degrees of certainty for establishment of a
diagnostic). I may rely on some classes from the Symptom ontology to
do so, but I would need to extend it in any case. I will need the IAO
to describe the guideline information, and the OGMS as well (similar
to what Bill did in his substance intolerance paper)

The goal is to be able to guide the clinician at the time of data
entry, by making sure that:
1/ the event they report indeed matches the case definition (such as
clinician reporting a seizure because he sees A and B - the system
would ask confirmation "did you see C as well?"),
2/ we store additional information that they may not have reported
upon otherwise (such as clinician reporting a seizure because he sees
A, B and C, but we also know that as it is a seizure there must be a D)
3/ helping to establish the correct diagnostic based on reported
symptoms (such as clinician sees A, B and C and let the system infer
that it is a seizure)

Later on, the idea would also be able to reconcile two reporting
systems, such as Public Health Canada and VAERS - if we describe
events based on the respective guidelines being used, a reasoner would
be able to infer the hierarchy of those, and we may be able to use
this to relate the two datasets.


MC: We also agreed that we are not talking about the same thing when using
the label "adverse event" - as per the above, I am talking about #3
("event reported in a specific timeframe post vaccination" for
example), while AEO talks about events for which causality has been
proven - which, if it happens, happens much later at #6.
WC: correct, but note that when it is proven, #3 does not “become”  an AEO: seizure. It was an instance thereof from the very beginning.

MC: I agree. The nature of the seizure doesn't change with time, what
we know about it may.



MC: AEO will work on formalizing that #6 hypothesis statement, while I
will focus on the best way to represent #3 (which based on what Werner
said would be closer to what he calls a RAPS event).

WC: yes, but ‘RAPS event’ being the RU for a defined class, not for  a universal. This is because a fiat, arbitrary boundary is drawn  between events that are reported, and events that are not. Being  reported upon is not a characteristic of an event. It is not because  I am looked at or talked about by somebody that I acquire an  additional feature (making abstraction of an occasional blush).

MC: Yes. You may have seen in the proposal I sent originally that
AEFI:seizure is a defined class.
It is a seizure (which could be coming in from a symptom ontology) and
an AEFI, where AEFI is defined as a sign (i.e., being observed by the
clinician) and presenting in a predetermined time frame following
administration of a coumpound or usage of a device. I should probably
make the "reported" element more explicit, I had taken it as implicit
from "being observed by the clinician". AEFI would therefore be
defined as "a sign presenting in a predetermined time frame following
administration of a coumpound or usage of a device and being reported
by the clinician". I need to work more on formalizing the reporting
part, building under IAO to do so. I would be happy to hear any
suggestion you may have to do so.


MC: To that effect I will develop a framework dealing with those reporting
systems and guidelines used to do so, such as specific Public Health
Canada guideline which says for example "for vaccine X, you should
report anything happening between 2 and 4 days post immunization" and
the Brighton guidelines, which describe a seizure as an adverse event
following immunization (in the mc-adverse-event sense)
WC: that is a very sensible thing to do

MC: We will later on try and reconcile the 2 resources - I was  mentioning
that in my opinion the elements AEO is currently dealing with will be
a subset of what I am interested in, and we should be able to plug
both together at a later stage.
WC: that is an implementation issue. What would be more accurate to  say is this: if the particular events that are instances of wc- adverse-event are represented as members of a set S1 and the  particular events that are instances of mc-adverse-event are  represented as members of a set S2, then S1 is a subset of S2.

MC: Yes, probably something along the lines of AEO:seizure equivalent
to "AEFI:seizure and causality hypothesis confirmed" - to be discussed
later once we have both components.